Documentation with Sphinx (#252)
twisted/pydoctor: docs/source/usage.rst

Usage
=====

.. contents::

Most common options
-------------------

The following exemple uses all most common options. 
It will add a link to your project website in all pages header and show a link to source code aside every documented elements. 

::

    pydoctor \
        --add-package=(packagedirectory) \
        --project-name=(name) \
        --project-url=https://github.com/(user)/(repo)/ \
        --html-viewsource-base https://github.com/(user)/(repo)/tree/(tag_or_commit_sha) \
        --make-html \
        --html-output=apidocs \
        --project-base-dir "$(pwd)" \
        --docformat=restructuredtext 

> .. note:: This exemple assume you are running the ``pydoctor`` build from Unix and the current directory is the root folder of your package. 

Reviewer: Does pydoctor work on Windows ? 
We are only testing it on Linux and maybe macOS.

Author: No idea

.. warning:: The ``--html-viewsource-base`` argument  should point to a tag or a commit SHA rather than a branch since line 
    numbers aren't going to match otherwise when commits are added to the branch after the documentation has been published.

> Publish your documentation with Github actions

Reviewer: not sure if we should keep this.

This is just standard static HTML file publishing .

So maybe just mention that pydoctor output are static HTML pages without no extra server-side support.
People should know what to do with them

Author: If you are talking about the whole Github action exemple, I think we should keep it as it makes it so easy to publish pydoctor docs by copy/pasting this action and gives exemple to users. 

The trick with `--project-url=https://github.com/$GITHUB_REPOSITORY` and `--html-viewsource-base=https://github.com/$GITHUB_REPOSITORY/tree/$GITHUB_SHA` are not obvious to everybody 

Let's keep it please

            # Allow pydoctor to exit with non-zero status code
            set +e

            # Run pydoctor build
            pydoctor \
                --add-package=(packagedirectory) \
                --project-name=(projectname) \
                --project-url=https://github.com/$GITHUB_REPOSITORY \
                --html-viewsource-base https://github.com/$GITHUB_REPOSITORY/tree/$GITHUB_SHA \
                --make-html \
                --html-output=./apidocs \
                --project-base-dir "$(pwd)" \
                --docformat=restructuredtext 

        - name: Publish pydoctor documentation to the gh-pages branch
          uses: peaceiris/actions-gh-pages@v3
          with:
            github_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
            publish_dir: ./apidocs
            commit_message: "Generate pydoctor documentation"

.. note:: As mentionned in the ``actions-gh-pages`` documentation, the first workflow run won't actually publish the documentation to Github pages. 
    Github pages needs to be enabled afterwards in the repo settings, select ``gh-pages`` branch, then re-run your workflow. 

    The website we'll be at https://(user).github.io/(repo)/

> Publish your documentation with Sphinx and Read The Docs

Reviewer: maybe remove this section for now...and add it once we create the Read The Docs Sphinx extension

--------------------------------------------------------

.. note:: Documentation to come!

Document part of your package
-----------------------------

Sometimes, only a couple classes or modules are part of your public API, not all classes and modules need to be documented.  

> You can choose to document only a couple classes or modules passed with argument ``--html-subject``.

Reviewer: It is not clear how html subject works... what is the input and what is the output.

.. warning:: The ``index.html`` won't be generated, you need to link to the specific HTML page. 

Sphinx Integration
------------------

> Sphinx object inventories can be used to create deep links between API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sphinx object inventories can be used to create links in both ways between
```

documentation generated by pydoctor and by Sphinx.

Linking to external API docs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It can link to external API documentation using a Sphinx objects inventory
with the following cumulative configuration option::

>     --intersphinx=http://sphinx-doc.org/objects.inv

Reviewer: It would help to have an example of pydoctor to sphinx usage in a similar way that we have the sphinx to pydoctor.

Maybe use a real life example using a link to stdlib.

Author: I've put https://docs.python.org/3/objects.inv instead

Linking to your API docs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

pydoctor's HTML generator will also generate a Sphinx objects inventory
using the following mapping:

* packages, modules -> py:mod:
* classes -> py:class:
* functions -> py:func:
* methods -> py:meth:
* attributes -> py:attr:

To use this mapping in Sphinx, configure the `intersphinx extension`__::

    intersphinx_mapping = {
        'pydoctor': ('http://domain.tld/api', None),
    }

__ https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html

And use external references::

    :py:func:`External API <pydoctor:pydoctor.model.Documentable.reparent>`

    :py:mod:`pydoctor:pydoctor`
    :py:mod:`pydoctor:pydoctor.model`
    :py:func:`pydoctor:pydoctor.driver.getparser`
    :py:class:`pydoctor:pydoctor.model.Documentable`
    :py:meth:`pydoctor:pydoctor.model.Documentable.reparent`
    :py:attr:`pydoctor:pydoctor.model.Documentable.kind`

Customize builds
----------------

> .. warning:: PyDoctor does not have a stable API yet. Custom builds are prone to break. Nevertheless, `PyDoctor's API documentation is available here <api/>`_. 

Reviewer: This link is broken... I think that we can remove it and add it later in the Sphinx extension pluging

Author: Yes it was working with Github Pages, but for now I'll remove it

System class allows you to dynamically show/hide classes or methods. 
This is also used by the Twisted project to handle deprecation.

See the `Twisted custom class documentation <https://twistedmatrix.com/documents/current/api/twisted.python._pydoctor.TwistedSystem.html>`_. Naviguate to the source code for a better overview.

.. note:: Not fully documented, prone to break

Use custom HTML templates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently, custom HTLM templates needs to be handled with some "monkeypatch" that will selectively use the appropriate templates.

See the `Twisted custom class documentation <https://twistedmatrix.com/documents/current/api/twisted.python._release.APIBuilder.html>`_. Naviguate to the source code for a better overview.
The key thing is to apply a patch to the :py:func:`pydoctor:pydoctor.templatewriter.util.templatefile` function. 

.. note:: Not fully documented, prone to break

Use a custom HTML writer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can subclass the :py:class:`pydoctor:pydoctor.templatewriter.writer.TemplateWriter` and pass your custom class dotted name with the ``--html-writer`` argument. 

.. note:: Not fully documented, prone to break

Full help
---------

> .. include:: help.txt

Reviewer: Not sure if we should show the pydoctor help here.... I guess that anyone can run pydoctor --help and see the options.

But I can undestand that it can help come people discover pydoctor features without having to install it.

So is OK to have it... but maybe have it as a top level RST page.

This page is already long

Author: I'll put it on a top level page `help.rst`

Usage
=====

.. contents::

Most common options
-------------------

The following exemple uses all most common options. 
It will add a link to your project website in all pages header and show a link to source code aside every documented elements. 

::

    pydoctor \
        --add-package=(packagedirectory) \
        --project-name=(name) \
        --project-url=https://github.com/(user)/(repo)/ \
        --html-viewsource-base=https://github.com/(user)/(repo)/tree/(tag_or_commit_sha) \
        --make-html \
        --html-output=apidocs \
        --project-base-dir="$(pwd)" \

>         --docformat=restructuredtext 

Reviewer: Maybe update this example with the actual pydoctor call on the pydoctor source code.

For example, someone should be able to clone the pydoctor repo, run `pip install -e .` and then copy paste the command from here and see the results.

Maybe also explain that the output is find in the `apidocs` directory.

I would prefer to have the ouput in `build/apidocs` to make it clear the the `apidocs` files are generated and not part of the repo.

    The website we'll be at https://(user).github.io/(repo)/

    __ https://github.com/peaceiris/actions-gh-pages

.. With Sphinx and Read The Docs
.. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. .. note:: Documentation to come!

Document part of your package
-----------------------------

Sometimes, only a couple classes or modules are part of your public API, not all classes and modules need to be documented.  

You can choose to document only a couple classes or modules with the following cumulative configuration option::

  --html-subject=pydoctor.zopeinterface.ZopeInterfaceSystem

This will generate only ``pydoctor.zopeinterface.ZopeInterfaceSystem.html`` and ``objects.inv`` (and CSS and JS files of course). 
The ``--add-package`` argument still needs to be passed, ``--html-subject`` will act like a filter.  

.. warning:: The ``index.html`` and other index files won't be generated, you need to link to the specific HTML page. 

Sphinx Integration
------------------

Sphinx object inventories can be used to create links in both ways between
documentation generated by pydoctor and by Sphinx.

> Linking to external API docs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linking from pydoctor to external API docs
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It can link to external API documentation using a Sphinx objects inventory
with the following cumulative configuration option::

    --intersphinx=https://docs.python.org/3/objects.inv

> Linking to your API docs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linking from Sphinx to your pydoctor API docs
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

pydoctor's HTML generator will also generate a Sphinx objects inventory
using the following mapping:

* packages, modules -> py:mod:
* classes -> py:class:
* functions -> py:func:
* methods -> py:meth:
* attributes -> py:attr:

To use this mapping in Sphinx, configure the `intersphinx extension`__::

    intersphinx_mapping = {
        'pydoctor': ('http://domain.tld/api', None),
    }

__ https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html

> And use external references::

Reviewer: I know that this is not yet possible...but just a comment.

In parallel with the block literal it would be nice to also use a real reference so that people can see exactly how it looks.

Maybe something like this

````
Link to a :py:func:`pydoctor function with custom text <pydoctor:pydoctor.model.Documentable.reparent>` 
is used as::

    :py:func:`pydoctor function with custom text <pydoctor:pydoctor.model.Documentable.reparent>

Link to the module with default label :py:mod:`pydoctor:pydoctor.model` ::

    :py:mod:`pydoctor:pydoctor.model`
```

Author: I've used twisted's intersphinx for the demo
